README.md, before:

# Project Useful Monorepo

All my scripts and things for Project Useful. The cryptic title is half
for fun, and half because I lack creativity.

This borrows from the data collected from [project-antipatterns].

# Installation Requirements

 - Python 3.8+. I use Python 3.8 on the Blackbox server and Python 3.11
   on my own laptop.
 - [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation)

# Install

**NOTE**: This step can be skipped if running the data collection code on the Blackbox server.

    $ poetry install

The only scripts that **require** external Python dependencies (and hence, require the above step) are:

 - `enhance-using-llms.py`
 - `rate-pems.py`

# Using `rate-pems.py`

Note, you will need to run `poetry install` to make this work (see
above).

You will need the following files in your current working directory:

 - `sample.pickle`
 - `llm.pickle`
 - `decaf.pickle`
 - `{yourname}-assignnments.tsv`

Then to run `rate-pems.py`, you can use the following command:

    poetry run python3 rate-pems.py

You should be presented with a source code listing, and an error
message, and a series of questions about that error message.

# Utilities

## Blackbox Mini

These files allow you to explore the data in Blackbox Mini. These should
be run on `white.bluej.org`:

 * `bbm-list` -- list versions of a file in Blackbox Mini
 * `bbm-view` -- show a file at a particular version in Blackbox Mini

## Data collection

NOTE: You will need to obtain `errors.sqlite3` separately, as this was
collected during [project-antipatterns].

 * `create-useful-database.py` -- reads `errors.sqlite3` and creates
   a new database of "eligible" programming error messages
 * `create-pem-index.py` -- reads `useful.sqlite3` and creates an index
   from programming error message category to the files/versions that
   induce that PEM.
 * `sample-pem-index.py` -- reads `pem-index.pickle` and prints a small
   sample of files/versions that induce a PEM category.
   This sample can be interpreted as a TSV file.
 - `pickle-sample.py` -- reads `sample.tsv` and collects source code and PEMs
   for all of the scenarios and stores them in `sample.pickle`.
   **This file must be run on the Blackbox server!**
 - `enhance-using-llm.py` -- reads `sample.pickle` and enhances the error
   messages using the OpenAI API. **This script costs you money!**
   The output is a messy directory structure called `llm/`.
 - `pickle-llm-results.py` -- takes the `llm/` directory structure,
   and creates `llm.pickle`, which is a much more easy-to-use version
   of the same information.
 - `enhance-using-decaf.py` -- reads `sample.pickle` and enhances the error
   messages using the Decaf CLI. The output is `decaf.pickle`.
   You will need the `decaf-cli.jar`, obtainable [here][decaf-cli].
 - `create-assignments.py` -- assign PEMs for each rater to rate
 - `combine-answers.py` -- combine answers from all raters

[decaf-cli]: https://github.com/eddieantonio/decaf/releases/tag/v3.3-cli

# Interactive scripts

 - `rate-pems.py` is an interactive TUI application, intended to collect
   judgements about PEM quality.


# Other info

I have copy-pasted a few files from [project-antipatterns], which is in
the `project_antipatterns` package.

[project-antipatterns]: https://github.com/eddieantonio/project-antipatterns

# Glossary

 - **scenario**: a _unit_ with at least one programming error message
   produced by `javac`.
 - **unit**: a Java source code file at a particular version
 - **sample**: a random sample of eligible scenarios
 - **PEM category**: a collection of clustered programming error messages.
   These somewhat correspond to the javac's internal error IDs, however there
   some of these IDs have been broken down into multiple categories.
 - **variant**: one of **`javac`**, **Decaf**, **GPT-4 (error-only)**, or
   **GPT-4 (with code context)**
 - **rater**: an expert in charge of rating error messages

# Copyright

All code Copyright © 2022, 2023 Eddie Antonio Santos. AGPL-3.0 Licensed.

Commit message:

[wip]: start the data analysis

README.md, after:

# Project Useful Monorepo

All my scripts and things for Project Useful. The cryptic title is half
for fun, and half because I lack creativity.

This borrows from the data collected from [project-antipatterns].

# Installation Requirements

 - Python 3.8+. I use Python 3.8 on the Blackbox server and Python 3.11
   on my own laptop.
 - [Poetry](https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation)

# Install

**NOTE**: This step can be skipped if running the data collection code on the Blackbox server.

    $ poetry install

The only scripts that **require** external Python dependencies (and hence, require the above step) are:

 - `enhance-using-llms.py`
 - `rate-pems.py`

If you need to do data-analysis, you will also have to this:

    $ poetry install --with data-analysis

# Using `rate-pems.py`

Note, you will need to run `poetry install` to make this work (see
above).

You will need the following files in your current working directory:

 - `sample.pickle`
 - `llm.pickle`
 - `decaf.pickle`
 - `{yourname}-assignnments.tsv`

Then to run `rate-pems.py`, you can use the following command:

    poetry run python3 rate-pems.py

You should be presented with a source code listing, and an error
message, and a series of questions about that error message.

# Utilities

## Blackbox Mini

These files allow you to explore the data in Blackbox Mini. These should
be run on `white.bluej.org`:

 * `bbm-list` -- list versions of a file in Blackbox Mini
 * `bbm-view` -- show a file at a particular version in Blackbox Mini

## Data collection

NOTE: You will need to obtain `errors.sqlite3` separately, as this was
collected during [project-antipatterns].

 * `create-useful-database.py` -- reads `errors.sqlite3` and creates
   a new database of "eligible" programming error messages
 * `create-pem-index.py` -- reads `useful.sqlite3` and creates an index
   from programming error message category to the files/versions that
   induce that PEM.
 * `sample-pem-index.py` -- reads `pem-index.pickle` and prints a small
   sample of files/versions that induce a PEM category.
   This sample can be interpreted as a TSV file.
 - `pickle-sample.py` -- reads `sample.tsv` and collects source code and PEMs
   for all of the scenarios and stores them in `sample.pickle`.
   **This file must be run on the Blackbox server!**
 - `enhance-using-llm.py` -- reads `sample.pickle` and enhances the error
   messages using the OpenAI API. **This script costs you money!**
   The output is a messy directory structure called `llm/`.
 - `pickle-llm-results.py` -- takes the `llm/` directory structure,
   and creates `llm.pickle`, which is a much more easy-to-use version
   of the same information.
 - `enhance-using-decaf.py` -- reads `sample.pickle` and enhances the error
   messages using the Decaf CLI. The output is `decaf.pickle`.
   You will need the `decaf-cli.jar`, obtainable [here][decaf-cli].
 - `create-assignments.py` -- assign PEMs for each rater to rate
 - `combine-answers.py` -- combine answers from all raters

[decaf-cli]: https://github.com/eddieantonio/decaf/releases/tag/v3.3-cli

# Interactive scripts

 - `rate-pems.py` is an interactive TUI application, intended to collect
   judgements about PEM quality.


# Other info

I have copy-pasted a few files from [project-antipatterns], which is in
the `project_antipatterns` package.

[project-antipatterns]: https://github.com/eddieantonio/project-antipatterns

# Glossary

 - **scenario**: a _unit_ with at least one programming error message
   produced by `javac`.
 - **unit**: a Java source code file at a particular version
 - **sample**: a random sample of eligible scenarios
 - **PEM category**: a collection of clustered programming error messages.
   These somewhat correspond to the javac's internal error IDs, however there
   some of these IDs have been broken down into multiple categories.
 - **variant**: one of **`javac`**, **Decaf**, **GPT-4 (error-only)**, or
   **GPT-4 (with code context)**
 - **rater**: an expert in charge of rating error messages

# Copyright

All code Copyright © 2022, 2023 Eddie Antonio Santos. AGPL-3.0 Licensed.
